Shipwreck of the Erika
The next item is the oral question (B5-0011/2000) by Mr Varela Suanzes-Carpegna, on behalf of the Committee on Fisheries, to the Commission, on the shipwreck of the Erika.
Mr President, Commissioner, ladies and gentlemen, firstly I want to warmly thank Mr Fischler for being here today.
Our President told us yesterday that the Commissioner would be unable to attend today due to prior commitments.
He must have reconsidered and, in so doing, has, as usual, shown great respect for this House. I thank him for this.
On behalf of the Committee on Fisheries, I must highlight our concerns about the shipwreck of the tanker Erika.
There are two political reasons why our committee and myself as its chairman must speak out about this issue.
Firstly, we must show the Commission, the Council and the Member States that this House cannot and will not forget about this serious incident.
Secondly, we must focus today on one specific aspect of this terrible environmental disaster, namely its effect on the fisheries and aquaculture sectors in the affected regions.
The epilogue to this disaster must surely be the urgent adoption of measures to minimise the damage and to prevent this happening again in the future.
Enough regrets and thoughts have been expressed about this event.
We must now get down to adopting measures, Commissioner.
Firstly, efficient controls are needed in Community waters and ports in order to ensure safety in maritime transport, particularly where oil and dangerous goods are involved.
The construction of these vessels, the use of double hulls, their age, their control by classification companies, insurance, the creation of databases containing all relevant information, Community cooperation and coordination, the reinforcement of control by inspectors and the liability of carriers and owners of cargoes are all issues which must be tackled. Who better than the European Commission to make serious proposals for European harmonisation in these areas?
Flags of convenience must also be specifically monitored and regulated in maritime transport, particularly as they do so much damage to the fisheries which we have taken to calling 'responsible fisheries' .
Access into Community waters of vessels flying flags of convenience which do not meet Community safety standards must be controlled.
We expect concrete action from the European Commission. The fisheries and aquaculture sectors in the affected areas of Brittany and the Vendée are particularly important, well-developed and prestigious.
The European Commission must therefore publicise the damage caused and its assessment of this damage. It must also indicate all the specific measures, including political, economic, social and financial measures, which it intends to adopt in order to minimise the damage and compensate the fishermen and industries which have been dramatically affected overnight.
How can consumer confidence in products from this area be regained?
How can those affected be compensated?
This is a very serious problem which the European Union, as an economic, commercial, industrial and fishing power, must tackle.
We must get to work and lead the way in these issues which are damaging our environment and destroying industries and occupations.
We must adopt preventative measures which can stop disasters like this from happening in the future.
This is the essence of my oral question on behalf of all the members of the Committee on Fisheries.
We hope to hear specific proposals from the Commission, with plenty of action and no more regrets.
This House will today approve a very important and appropriate joint motion for a resolution tabled by several groups.
Mr President, the shipwreck of the Erika off the coast of Brittany on 12 December caused an oil slick whose effects on the environment will be felt for years.
In addition to destroying natural resources, this accident has had a serious impact on certain economic sectors, particularly those dependent on fisheries.
With 20 000 tonnes of crude oil left in the holds of the sunken vessel, the situation could still deteriorate.
The consequences of this accident have been disastrous for the aquaculture and ostreiculture sectors which were defenceless against the pollution that could not be prevented from coming ashore. These consequences not only stem from the pollution which occurred immediately after the accident but also the subsequent loss of market share and the rejection by the consumer of a fully guaranteed product which is now affected by the pollution itself.
The regions affected are outlying ones with an unstable economic balance. They have been profoundly affected by this oil slick which, unfortunately, is not an isolated event.
The main resources of these and neighbouring regions are those granted by nature, which is nowadays too often being punished by man' s activities.
These events could be prevented with more care and control by the public authorities.
Prevention is better than cure or so the saying goes.
Surely the budget would agree, as prevention is much cheaper than the cost of disasters like these.
Mr Fischler says that he always comes to the House when asked.
Yet on the issue of the Erika he has given the impression, perhaps not to us but certainly to the inhabitants of Brittany and the Vendée, that, as the Fisheries Commissioner, he is not always available or, at best, available only on a part-time basis.
As this House indicated in its first resolution on 20 January, the needs of the severely affected fisheries, ostreiculture and tourism industries must be taken into account.
We therefore now call upon the Commission to urgently adopt measures to help the fisheries sector by means of special funds.
Galicia and Brittany now have the common ground of having suffered from oil slicks.
We cannot understand how it is that experiences like the Urquiola or Amoco Cadiz have not served to reinforce legislation on maritime transport in terms of both controlling safety in the movement of dangerous goods and flags of convenience.
Please let this be the last disaster of its type and let us learn all possible lessons from this.
We must urgently amend our legislation and close the loopholes which keep allowing these terrible disasters to happen.
The polluter pays principle is both necessary and appropriate.
It is time that polluters started to pay because, up to now, it has been those affected and taxpayers who have paid, and they have not just paid but cleaned up the affected areas as well.
I am therefore delighted at Mr Fischler' s response, particularly his recognition of the need to apply retroactive measures and to give a rapid response to the applications submitted.
On behalf of the PSE Group, I want to send a message of solidarity to those affected, to the fishermen, farmers and businesspeople who enable the products of the sea to be regularly brought to market.
My message of solidarity also goes out to the mayors and politicians, to the volunteers who have worked to clean the affected areas and to all those who deserve our full support.
I wish to put two questions to the Commissioner.
Parliament has passed a resolution calling for the polluter pays principle to be applied in this instance and for both the shipowners and the owners of the cargo to be liable.
The question for the Commissioner is really whether these principles can actually be applied and whether we will get any money by way of compensation from these people.
The second point relates to the future and the publication of the Commission' s White Paper on environmental liability which is designed to ensure that the polluter pays principle applies in future and to ensure that we are better able to enforce European environmental legislation properly.
It is recognised in that White Paper that liability is only effective where the polluter can be identified, where the damage can be quantified and where a clear causal connection can be made between the two.
The Erika incident could not illustrate the point more clearly because it sums up exactly what that White Paper is seeking to address.
This question really would therefore seem to be a perfect measure of how to deal with problems of this kind in future.
The proposed directive provides for strict liability for damage caused by EU-regulated dangerous activities and my concern, and perhaps the Commissioner can deal with this, is whether or not the environmental liability paper will be able to deal with problems of the type of Erika in future. Will it really address the concern or will, in practice, in the case of maritime accidents involving ships on the high seas, the polluter once again escape from having to pay for the damage they cause.
Mr President, our sympathy and our solidarity go out to those people and regions stricken by the disaster, but good intentions are not enough, there must be compensation for the damage and losses covering both the restoration of the environment and the shellfish farms and fishing equipment.
We are pleased to hear the Commissioner announce the urgent need to act and to offer compensation, and for this to be backdated.
We also deplore the excessively lax application of vessel inspection, and we are in favour of creating a European coast guard authority, and also, in particular, of introducing more binding regulations and making double hulls mandatory.
We further deplore the system of flags of convenience with regard to both merchant vessels and fishing boats.
Finally, we were shocked to learn that the cargo was extremely carcinogenic, with a polyaromatic hydrocarbon content of more than 1 000 parts per million.
This means that the 15 000 tonnes of cargo released into the sea include 15 tonnes of highly toxic products.
This is not acceptable. We only found out too late and, as a result, medical inspection must be provided, paying special attention to the volunteers who dedicated themselves to restoring the environment.
Finally, we think it absolutely essential to pay particular attention to preventing such risks, as well as to scientific research work in order to avoid and eliminate damage.
A great many proposals have been made which warrant investigation.
Solutions cannot be found at the last minute, when the disaster is already in progress.
Consequently, the bulk of the action must be taken beforehand.
Mr President, over two months after the wreck of the Erika, pollution of the coasts, which have already been cleaned once, is still continuing.
While reiterating my solidarity with all the victims of this, I should like to salute the dedication of the workers, professionals and volunteers, who are still involved in cleaning the polluted beaches.
Thanks to the grass-roots involvement, which this House furthered by organising a debate and adopting a resolution on 20 January, an initial raft of measures has been announced.
The French Government has initiated a discussion and made proposals to strengthen maritime safety, particularly by fighting against the phenomenon of flags of convenience and by implementing much more extensive inspection.
The lessons of this latest oil slick must be learnt in full, and decisions must be taken speedily at Community level to prevent coffin ships sailing off our shores or berthing in our ports, to make double hulls mandatory for the transportation of pollutants, and to strengthen standards for safety and inspection.
We must also demand that the parties truly responsible be made to pay the costs incurred due to the pollution.
So, yes, Total Fina must provide the financial resources to contribute to the repair of ecological, economic and social damage and to compensate the people affected by the disaster.
The French State has released funds for compensating damage.
I feel, however, that the European Union has so far not actually come up with any expression of Community solidarity at the requisite level.
So, yes, appropriations must be released at Community level to support the cleaning of the contaminated coastlines, to assist the organisations which went into action to save oil-covered birds, and to contribute towards getting the affected businesses back on their feet.
Specific compensation should be provided for the fishermen and shellfish farmers who have suffered considerable loss of income and who face having to invest considerable sums in order to repair everything and regain consumer confidence.
I was pleased to hear the statement which Commissioner Fischler has just made, and I take careful note of the commitments he made before this House.
I should also like to say that my Group shall remain vigilant and committed, in collaboration with the grass-roots action groups, to ensuring that the parties affected receive compensation as soon as possible and that legislation is strengthened at every level, supported by realistic penalties in the event of non-compliance.
Mr President, the reason why it is important to return to the subject of the oil slick, two and a half months after the wreck of the Erika, is because the extent of the economic, social and ecological disaster affecting our Atlantic coastline is, in fact, far greater than the first assessments gave us to understand.
Cakes of tar are still washing in along 500 km of the Atlantic coastline on a daily basis.
Curiously, the exact composition of the cargo has still not been clarified.
The ecological disaster is a major one, possibly unprecedented in scale.
Large-scale degassing proliferates and the 16 000 tonnes of tar remaining in the wreck at a depth of 120 m present a major risk of fresh pollution.
All workers in the fishing, fish farming and aquaculture sectors have already been hit hard.
The chief victims today are the shellfish farmers who were once the most successful producers in Europe.
The frontline victims are the producers or freight forwarders banned in the Vendée and Loire-Atlantique regions.
Some of them have already lost several years' worth of harvests, but the 50% to 80% slump in sales is affecting all the harbours on the Atlantic coastline, and even those in the Channel and North Sea.
As regards fishing proper, passive gear fishing is currently the hardest hit.
After shellfish, the slump is now affecting crustacean sales.
The many fishing days lost affect the entire industry and, above all, the future of fishery products, an area in which prices had seen something of a turnaround in very recent years, now hangs entirely on consumer reaction and we are starting to see signs, unfortunately, of initial disenchantment.
The two principle resources of the Atlantic shore, fishing and tourism, both closely interrelated, have both been seriously affected.
There is a danger that the season will be lost, resulting in an extremely serious crisis by the end of the year.
The fact that Parliament is presenting a new resolution, one to which our Group has made a significant contribution, is therefore perfectly justifiable.
It emphasises a number of points deemed crucial at grass roots level.
The first point is that the polluter must accept his liability in full.
Our resolution calls for two principles to be applied: the first is the 'polluter cleans' principle, since it is unacceptable that the cleaning of coasts polluted by hydrocarbon cargoes should be borne by the local authorities, i.e. the taxpayers, i.e. the victims, and not the cargo owner.
The second principle is the 'polluter pays' principle.
According to our resolution, the polluter' s liability must extend to fishing, fish farming and aquaculture industries and businesses.
This is essential. It means that the polluter cannot claim to limit the amount of compensation for victims in line with the ceiling set by FIPOL, which is to say, by the goodwill of the major oil companies.
If the FIPOL ceiling is insufficient, and it has clearly been underestimated, then it must be raised.
Our resolution calls for this.
If the increase is not enough then the polluter should pay the balance.
It would be particularly unfair to have an oil company, whose profits this year amount to FRF 10 billion, refusing to give 100% compensation to its own victims, the great majority of whom are small businesses and employees.
Commissioner, the stricken people await tangible expressions of solidarity at European level.
Our resolution calls upon the Commission to take the necessary steps to assist in repairing the damage caused in the fishing industry affected by the consequences of the disaster.
Maritime Europe and the CFP must today demonstrate that, in addition to imposing constraints on fishermen, it is not unfamiliar with the concept of solidarity.
The European Union must also participate in the restoration of the wetland and coastal environments affected, whose biological value is important to the Union as a whole.
Mr Fischler has just told us that he would welcome France' s requests. I am pleased to hear it.
We must act as a catalyst in this crucial issue of maritime pollution.
Twenty years after the Amoco Cadiz disaster laxness and irresponsibility still reign supreme in Europe in matters of maritime safety, resulting in yet more oil slicks.
This time, we must not let inertia win the day.
A basis for maritime safety must be drawn up speedily, respecting the principle of subsidiarity, and we must at long last put an end to this downward spiral of widespread irresponsibility.
Mr President, the economy of the western Atlantic coastline has been devastated, polluted by oil from the Erika.
Fishermen, oyster farmers, shellfish farmers, workers in the tourist industry, and local and regional authorities are growing impatient while waiting for aid and for someone to deal with the time-bomb which the apparently still leaking wreck represents.
Having withdrawn the budget line for 'natural disasters affecting Member States' with such poor timing, Europe has a duty to respond, firstly in the name of solidarity but also because it shares responsibility in this umpteenth oil slick disaster.
European citizens find it hard to understand why Europe accepts conditions which the Americans refuse and why Europe, normally so quick to pass environmental legislation, has until now blocked any measures to do with maritime safety.
Europe must pass legislation at the earliest possible opportunity and investigate the matter of this wreck thoroughly, but, in the meantime, the Commission must, as a matter of urgency, harness European funds to aid the businesses affected in order to deal with the wreck, clean up the coastline, increase the capacity of waste storage facilities, ensure that waste is processed or recycled, and set up a research programme into the recovery of oil spilt at sea.
Finally, the Commission must reintroduce an appropriate budget line for 'natural disasters involving Member States' , and make the regions affected eligible for Structural Funds.
What is the Commission' s view of these proposals?
What decisions has the Commission already taken and what decisions does it plan to take?
How did the Commission follow up the resolution which the European Parliament adopted on 20 January 2000?
We have not, thus far, seen any practical action whatsoever.
Mr President, echoing the thoughts of a number of Members, I should like to tell you that, two and a half months after the wreck, the situation remains particularly critical and every day the scale of the disaster becomes even more apparent.
There are two aspects, the first being the environmental angle.
The wreck still contains 16 000 tonnes of heavy gas oil which is leaking and, in addition to these leaks, unfortunately, last week we observed and counted 35 acts of ecological piracy, 35 degassing operations, disgracefully aggravating this already catastrophic situation.
Mrs de Palacio expressed her views at length regarding this issue and I feel she set to work without waiting for an element which today is absolutely essential, a draft European maritime law, following a draft directive on the maritime transportation of dangerous goods.
From this point of view, this fits in with the wish of the French to see their presidency characterised by regulations which work towards increasing safety.
The secondary impact, however, is proving to be on the economy, the primary impact being environmental and only the second economic, as many Members have stated.
Shellfish farming, fishing, oyster farming and fish farming are today seriously affected, for the effects of the oil slick have been compounded by the storm damage affecting many areas.
Unfortunately, these sectors have been devastated: they have first to rebuild and then, perhaps the most difficult thing, to regain consumer confidence.
Confronted with this situation, the inhabitants of Brittany, the Vendée and Charente, as well as the forestry workers in other regions, await a signal from the European Union.
We cannot claim that rapprochement with the citizens is the touchstone of this legislative period if, at the same time, we hold our tongues and do not offer practical responses in the face of phenomena of this magnitude.
I took very careful note of Commissioner Fischler' s remarks, perhaps the most practical suggestions we have heard to date.
There have been many declarations of sympathy and solidarity, and many announcements, admittedly, but now it is time for expectations to be met with a tangible display of European solidarity.
The Erika oil spill is one of a catalogue of disasters that have taken place in recent years in Community waters, including the Braer spill off Shetland and the Sea Empress off Wales.
These spills, in addition to causing irreparable ecological damage, have devastated local industries.
In the case of the Erika, the local fishing and aquaculture industries have suffered a bitter blow and it is important not just to look at the harmful effects that are apparent today but also to look ahead at the long-term detrimental effects of oil pollution.
Effective compensation is essential.
It is time that shipping safety within the Community was tightened up and that greater controls were introduced, including bringing an end to the use of flags of convenience which is also increasingly resorted to in the fisheries sector.
The companies responsible, the ship and the cargo owners must pay up for their negligence.
The current compensation funds are inadequately funded and this was all too apparent in the case of the Braer disaster where the Shetland Islands fishing industry was inadequately compensated for their losses.
We must learn from past experience and make sure that the industries affected by the Braer spill can be rebuilt.
Mr President, today, once again, it is necessary to discuss the Erika disaster, two and a half months after it occurred, because its tragic consequences are far from over.
Now we must continue both to apply pressure, together with citizens' organisations, to ensure that Total pays the full costs for everything destroyed due to its unbridled pursuit for profits, and also to make a firm commitment to ensuring that this type of disaster never happens again.
Even though the joint motion for a resolution is an interesting one, it does not tackle the subject of flags of convenience, a problem which must be both condemned and resolved as a matter of urgency if we are to contribute to the principle of preventing maritime disasters.
It is actually not so much a matter of improving safety checks on these flags of convenience, as stipulated in the resolution, as actually working right now to eliminate their existence.
This is the only solution to ensure that seafarers' living and working conditions are satisfactory, that they are covered by effective legislation and social protection, and that fishing operations and the environment are respected.
Parliament adopts a resolution after every maritime disaster.
Generally it puts forward positive technical measures, some of which are adopted in directives.
If they were applied, they would in fact serve to counter the idea of cutting costs to the minimum, a policy which is maintained through flags of convenience.
Mr President, Commissioner, in the capacity of rapporteur for the directive on port reception facilities, one of whose objectives is the prevention of marine pollution, I would like to make a few observations which occurred to me on matters which, to my mind, were not sufficiently dealt with at the Green Shipping Conference in Hamburg which everyone attended.
It was stated at this conference that disasters account for 5% to 10% of oil pollution. This may be very concentrated and create many problems, but it is industry which is responsible for 60% of pollution.
And, by way of an indication, 10% is caused by natural pollution.
What I would like to propose within the framework not so much of technical improvements, better inspection or improved legislation (which, I admit, are all necessary) but, rather, within the framework of socially responsible management, is a kind of round-table conference comprising those involved in, and affected by, the pollution of the seas with oil.
I would like to advocate this.
I want to thank Commissioner Fischler for his answer to the oral question tabled by our committee. He has given us some important information.
The Commissioners who appear before this House armed with specific and important information are always to be thanked.
With regard to the specific case of the Erika, measures are being taken and action is being coordinated with the French authorities.
Our main concern has been that we do not end up discussing this type of event again. Preventative measures are the answer to the question of what can we do.
It has been said that the Commission will meet to adopt a range of technical and legal measures.
This is the right way to go.
These measures are very welcome and the Committee on Fisheries will monitor these very closely so that we do not have to spend more time in this House regretting such disasters.
I have received 5 motions for resolutions pursuant to Rule 42(2).