The next item is the report (A5-0104/2000) by Mr Langen on behalf of the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs on the report from the Commission to the Council and the European Parliament on the operation of Commission Regulation No 3932/92 concerning the application of Article 81 (ex-Article 85), Paragraph 3, of the Treaty to certain categories of agreements, decisions and concerted practices in the field of insurance (COM(1999) 192 - C5.0254/1999 - 1999/2183(COS))
Mr President, this time the subject at the close of the sitting is not fisheries, but competition policy. We have discussed this subject in great depth.
It has not been too controversial, so it is also possible to discuss it at the end of such a sitting.
Since I am often here on Fridays anyway, I personally do not find this at all difficult.
The subject is exemption regulations, which are in force for the European insurance industry.
You all know that competition law has been one of the most important objectives of the European Union - and therefore of the European Commission - since the founding Treaties came into existence.
The general aim of competition law is to ensure that there is competition in the European Internal Market.
This serves consumers, promotes technical progress, and prevents monopolies and agreements.
Therefore, the rules on this are strict.
The Commission can and must take action in accordance with the rules, which have three different spheres of application: agreements or cartel agreements which are generally prohibited, abuse of a dominant market position, and public subsidies.
Over the past few years, the Commission, on all these issues, has repeatedly shown that it takes the provisions of the Treaties very seriously.
We will deal with the first of these areas today.
The general prohibition of cartel agreements is lifted under certain conditions; these are the exemption regulations.
Price fixing, restrictions on, or control of, production, dividing up markets, application of different prerequisites for the same services and the extra provisions of the Treaties, which often vary tremendously in Europe and exclude different services, are incompatible with the laws, even in the areas where exemption regulations apply.
Under Article 81(3), exemption regulations only apply - please listen carefully - when consumers receive an appropriate share of the benefit generated and no unnecessary restrictions ruling out competition are imposed.
A regulation of this kind has existed in the field of insurance since 1992, and expires in 2003.
The Commission is required to submit a situation report every six years. The present report is available.
The Block Exemption Regulation for the insurance industry lays down and permits common rules governing agreement on the calculation of premiums, the stipulation of policy conditions, joint coverage of certain types of risk, and safety precautions.
To date, agreements on claims settlement and registers of aggravated risks have not been included.
I hope that when the Rothley report on the harmonisation of civil liability insurance in respect of the use of motor vehicles is adopted after the third reading on Monday, the Commission can, and will, also incorporate - on account of the harmonised legal basis - the settlement of claims into this future exemption regulation.
It will then be much easier for European Union citizens, in future, to be able to settle claims abroad, including in EU Member States, with their own insurers, safe in the knowledge that these agreements are also then guaranteed by the Commission within the framework of the exemption regulation.
Parliament has made unanimous demands on the Commission in its proposal. These should be taken into consideration by the Commission when examining the proposal.
This concerns, firstly, the definition of market share in a globalised market, followed by detailed questions about the lead insurer, for whom this might not apply.
When there is one large and 20 small insurers, then the large one may not have more than 10 per cent of the market share for the exemption agreement to be accepted.
Whether this is correct or not is doubtful.
This concerns matters which are connected with the possibility of termination.
We want the notice period for an insurance company to be 6 months and not 12, and we want to bring about a harmonised basis for European standards in the settlement of claims.
All in all, I can say that Parliament is satisfied with this interim report and that it expects the Commission to make continuous progress on this matter and achieve an end result for the insurance industry within the framework of the exemption regulations in force, all of which expire in 2002 and 2003, including for other areas.
With this in mind, I would urge you to give your assent. Thank you very much.
Affairs and the Internal Market. I would particularly like to express my own gratitude to Mr Langen for his report and for the great clarity with which, in writing and in his presentation today, he has brought to our attention what this is all about.
I am glad to say that the Committee on Legal Affairs and the Internal Market is in substantial agreement with Mr Langen and finds no legal obstacles to this bloc exemption regulation.
As Members of the House will know, the bloc exemption creates exemptions from normal competition law, of the kind Mr Langen mentioned, in relation to the calculation of premiums where net premiums may be jointly calculated by insurers.
Secondly, in the establishment of standard policy conditions for direct insurance and common models illustrating profits from insurance policies involving an element of capitalisation.
It also creates an exemption to make possible co-insurance, common coverage of certain risks and, finally, the coordination of technical specifications for safety equipment and procedures.
The Commission says in its report that it is disappointed that the insurance industry has not taken up as much of that as it might have done.
These are all areas where it seems clear that there is a genuine public interest in not insisting on the strictest rigours of competition law.
What that draws to our attention, in a philosophical way, is that even in a competitive market, insurance is inherently a collective activity in which people share risks among themselves.
If I might make a remark about a currently controversial topic in my own country, I think it is a pity to see such vigorous efforts being made to de-mutualise excellent old mutual assurance companies which fully express the collective aspect of insurance, and I am sad to think of a raid being made on the Standard Life in this way.
Mr President, first of all I would like to thank the rapporteur, Mr Langen, and all those who have contributed to this draft resolution on the Commission's report on the operation of the insurance block exemption regulation.
The Commission welcomes the draft resolution, not only for its overall support concerning the Commission's application of the regulation, but also for the specific comments which it contains on how the regulation can be improved.
A brief word of background about the regulation in question is perhaps in order.
Before 1992, the competition directorate-general of the Commission was submerged by literally hundreds of notifications of agreements in the insurance field, many of which raised similar issues and were eligible for an exemption under Article 81(3) of the Treaty.
Rather than adopting hundreds of individual exemption decisions, the Commission adopted in 1992 a block exemption regulation granting exemption, with conditions, to agreements between insurance undertakings in four categories: agreements concerning the joint calculation of risk premiums, those concerning standard policy conditions, co-insurance and reinsurance, pooling arrangements and agreements adopting standards for safety equipment.
The Council Regulation of 1991 enabling the Commission to adopt an insurance block exemption regulation also authorised the inclusion of two further areas which the Commission, however, decided not to include in its regulation for lack of experience in those areas, namely agreements on claims settlement and agreements on registers of aggravated risk.
Following the adoption of the Block Exemption Regulation in 1992, most of the notifications on the Commission's table were withdrawn, but some were not, as the notifying parties considered that the regulation did not provide total clarity as to whether their agreements were eligible for exemption.
Most of these notifications concerned insurance pools.
The current regulation expires on 31 March 2003 and a new regulation will be necessary.
The future regulation should build on these strengths and remedy any weaknesses in the existing one.
The report produced by the Commission on 12 May 1999, which it was pursuant to Article 8 of the Council enabling regulation, was the first step in the process leading to the adoption of a new regulation.
It summarises in detail the experience of the Commission in applying the regulation and the various problems it has identified.
It does not, however, contain precise proposals for the future regulation.
These will only be decided upon after the end of the consultation process.
Considerable account will be taken of Parliament's resolution in this process.
Other interested parties, including professional insurance bodies and consumer organisations, will also be consulted.
The next step in the consultation will be a hearing organised by the Commission on 28 June of this year for an exchange of views between all those who have submitted comments on the report on the regulation.
This hearing responds in part to the call in the draft resolution for an informative debate on the regulation.
It is clear that the area in which most improvement to the regulation is needed is that of pools.
Significant change will be necessary here, but key questions exist in all the other areas.
The comments and suggestions contained in the draft resolution, for which I thank Parliament, are all relevant and interesting in this context, although each of them will have to be analysed individually and on its merits.
May I just respond at this stage to two issues of a similar nature raised by both Mr Langen and Mr Meijer, and that is the question whether the Commission accepts the draft opinion's recommendation that agreements on claims settlement should be included in the future block exemption regulation.
The Commission has an open mind at this stage as to whether agreements on claim settlement and agreements on registers of aggravated risks should be covered by the future regulation.
It takes good note of the fact that the draft opinion recommends the inclusion of agreements and on claims settlement.
The conclusion of the draft resolution that the regulation has been successful overall, but that a moderate enhancement is needed, is one that the Commission entirely shares.
The draft resolution is a most helpful contribution to this end and the Commission will keep Parliament fully informed and consulted on the process of revising the regulation.
That concludes the debate.
We shall now proceed to the vote.
(Parliament adopted the resolution) EXPLANATION OF VOTE
