humanitarian activities
The next item is the report (A5-0191/2000) by Mr Imbeni, on behalf of the Committee on Development and Cooperation, on the Communication from the Commission to the Council and the European Parliament: Assessment and future of Community humanitarian activities (Article 20 of Regulation (EC) 1257/96) (COM(1999) 468 - C5-0044/2000 - 2000/2016 (COS)).
Mr President, I would like to start by thanking all my fellow Members from the various Parliamentary groups who have made a substantial contribution to the preparatory work for this report to express Parliament' s position on the Commission' s Communication on ECHO' s activities, on emergency aid and on humanitarian activities.
The committee' s unanimity regarding the report is evidence of highly profitable cooperation, and I hope that this will be reflected in the final vote in the Chamber tomorrow.
A discussion on ECHO, or humanitarian aid, will include mention of the worst tragedies and the greatest contradictions of our time.
It will touch on war, natural disasters and the damage to the world' s ecology system, on the continued tragic ethnic conflicts and civil and military wars, on the basic injustice underlying the North/South relationship and the suffering, in particular, of the most vulnerable peoples; of women, children and the elderly.
And the truth is that the forecast for the next few years does not indicate an improvement in this situation.
I merely refer to a number of newspaper articles which have appeared during recent months on issues such as the fact that a totally unexpected part of the North Pole has shown signs of melting, the water poisoning in Bangladesh which is endangering safety, health and hygiene conditions for 25 million people, or the drought in many parts of Africa.
We must therefore be responsible and realistic, and, even more than in the past, we must plan action for the future to prevent natural disasters and to respond to the consequences of the tragedies often - almost always - caused by man.
These planning operations require an improvement in coordination at international level between the European Union and all the other parties involved in humanitarian aid, and greater cooperation within the European Union between the Commission and the instruments available to the Member States, in order to avoid the repetition of the frequent past cases - referred to in the Commission document and confirmed by the assessments - of duplication and repetition of action and, thus, wastage of energy and resources.
In this context, I find it unacceptable - and both my report and Parliament' s position are clear on this point - that ECHO should be reduced to a source of funding for initial relief operations and nothing else.
We need to act in a wider perspective. The objective of ECHO and of European Union activities must be, firstly, to increase preventive action and then, secondly, to link emergency and initial relief actions to the operations intended to re-establish minimum living conditions in places affected by natural disasters and wars, thereby providing humanitarian aid during the stage following provision of emergency aid.
The sums in question may well be limited, in terms of more general budgets, but we are talking about EUR 2 500 million which have been allocated over the last four years by the European Commission to non-governmental organisations (56%), United Nations agencies (25%), the Red Cross (11%) and other direct operations carried out by ECHO or specialised Member States agencies.
There we are. In my opinion, the Commission' s analysis compels us to act to further strengthen ECHO and to avoid the prevalence of certain positions present within the Council, which is divided over these issues.
Certain people in the Council are of the opinion that ECHO' s activities should be reduced, but I take the completely opposite view.
One very last point, Mr President: ECHO cannot be treated as an ATM service where international agencies or non-governmental organisations withdraw money and do not even tell the beneficiaries where the funding came from.
The European public and the beneficiaries should be told about this remarkable work by ECHO.
This is why we have proposed - and I hope that Commissioner Patten, who is not listening to me at the moment, will take this proposal on board with due consideration - that an information campaign be mounted to inform the public of our countries how our money is being spent and how our resources are being used, and we propose that this information campaign should not, of course, be financed out of ECHO funds but out of the ad hoc funds.
Mr President, the rapporteur, Mr Imbeni, has done an excellent job.
There is no need to repeat anything.
I should like to expand on two problematic issues.
The first is a question of principle.
Humanitarian aid has to be provided regardless of what has caused the catastrophes concerned and irrespective of any other political objectives.
Its increasing politicisation in recent years is an unacceptable and, ultimately, also inhumane phenomenon.
But at the same time, it should also be noted that the growing number of catastrophes is not only due to natural events over which we have no control.
As it is, this cannot be said of wars, in which humanitarian aid has to be supplied, perhaps by ECHO.
An increasing number of natural disasters are clearly linked to the fact that we are placing ever greater demands on the global ecosphere and biosphere.
The United Nations' Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change, IPCC, has reported, for example, that we can already see a, "discernible human influence on global climate".
Our concepts of crisis management ought therefore, in my opinion, also to have a socio-political dimension and be integrated into development policy and, for example, economic policy strategy.
Otherwise we will, in many cases, only be repairing the damage inflicted as a consequence of our own policy, and the people in the countries of the South, in particular, will suffer as a result of the disasters which we have caused.
The second problem is directly linked to the first and yet is of a very practical nature.
I call on the Commission - even if the extensive problem which I have just outlined is not yet resolved - to link the design, organisation and operation of humanitarian aid more closely to development policy.
The Commission has already made attempts to do this, which I feel still need to be stepped up considerably and freed of red tape.
An example of this is, in my opinion, the concept of emergency relief which is geared to development, which the Gesellschaft für Technische Zusammenarbeit (Company for Technical Cooperation) is trying to put into practice.
Mr President, I should first like to salute Mr Imbeni, the author of this report, and express my appreciation of his work.
It is an excellent report which both identifies the main points of criticism and describes ways to ensure that ECHO is able to work effectively in the future.
We have had this office for humanitarian aid in the EU since 1992, and both evaluation reports - which form the main basis of the assessment, together with the Commission's report - contain high praise for ECHO in respect of its work so far, while identifying several very serious weak points.
Although the assessment of ECHO's work in terms of efficiency compared with costs, is very positive, there still remains the problem of the infamous 'grey area' in the time immediately following the events which trigger the provision of relief.
Humanitarian operations in this 'grey area' cannot be assessed on the basis of precise criteria, nor do they provide the information and recommendations required for future ECHO operations in the area.
It is therefore necessary, in my opinion, to improve disaster preparedness and step up the provision of disaster relief as a priority.
It should be noted here that the regional approach adopted by the existing DIPECHO instrument offers a possible solution.
At the same time, however, the lack of sufficiently flexible alternative instruments within the Commission is to be lamented.
The Commission needs to present a clear strategy for the role which the humanitarian aid provided by ECHO has to play as part of foreign and development policy.
ECHO does not have the necessary human resources to do the job of a planning headquarters.
Staffing levels are below those characteristic of other Commission departments and well below those in national administrations, which are known to invest considerably less in crisis prevention.
Here the appropriations, which currently stand at around EUR 7.5 million, therefore need to be at least - wait for it - quadrupled to allow the work to be done effectively.
It is particularly regrettable - and Mr Imbeni has already made this point as well - that when projects are developed and run through partners, around 56% of which are non-governmental organisations, they are not identified strongly enough in the public arena as European Union aid.
I believe that there is a considerable need for action here in the future.
The public has to be informed, but please not with the funds which are directly available to ECHO.
We should continue to pursue the positive initiatives here and use alternative sources of funding to defray the costs of informing the public.
Mr President, Commissioner, I would like to congratulate Mr Imbeni because I believe he has produced a splendid report and, while we were debating it in committee, we were already in complete agreement with his proposals.
The Socialist Group believes that aid policy must be the flagship of the European Union' s external activities insofar as it reflects the ideas which must inspire the construction of the European Union, that is to say, solidarity and cohesion on a global level.
In these times of Commission reform, when many Community policies and procedures are being questioned, humanitarian aid has been evaluated positively by different bodies and, of course, on a political level, by Parliament.
It is true that there has been a lot of criticism of humanitarian aid.
However, we, who have seen and evaluated what ECHO has done, believe that its work has been very positive.
This report therefore serves to ratify the principle of humanitarian aid as a right for people involved in disasters and an obligation on the part of the international community, in which the European Union is a major player, in both quantitative and qualitative terms.
Nevertheless and with a view to the future, we must take some steps forward.
Firstly, we must overcome the so-called 'grey area' which was mentioned earlier, that is to say, the interregnum between the end of emergency aid and the beginning of the rehabilitation and development actions.
While this 'grey area' continues, in which nobody is administratively responsible, there will be people who do not receive assistance for no other reason than a lack of internal coordination within the Commission.
We have seen this in the case of Mozambique and other disasters.
Humanitarian aid did arrive, but during this interregnum it has not continued for rehabilitation and development cooperation.
Coordination within the Commission and complementarity with the Member States and other donors are factors which are fundamental to the efficiency which reform is intended to produce.
Secondly, it is urgent that we increase the number of staff dedicated to humanitarian aid activities.
The number of ECHO' s staff is not proportional to the importance of its work.
Thirdly - and this is closely related to the previous point - the budget for humanitarian aid must be increased proportionally with its political importance and the real objectives we wish to achieve and which can be counted in the most important terms: human lives.
In this respect, the Commission and the Council' s budgetary proposals are far from meeting what we believe to be the humanitarian needs.
Lastly, we must try harder and harder to improve the decentralisation and flexibility of relations with agents for humanitarian aid, fundamentally the NGOs.
An instrument was mentioned earlier, DIPECHO, which provides operative preparation for disaster situations.
We believe that it is essential that, when a humanitarian catastrophe occurs, whether natural or caused by man, instruments are already in place.
In this respect, we wish to highlight the importance of DIPECHO.
The Socialist Group supports the principles which govern humanitarian aid and its future in the terms which I expressed earlier.
We do not believe that this should become a token policy, but rather a flagship, together with development cooperation, of the European Union' s external action.
Mr Imbeni said earlier - I do not know if the Commissioner heard what he said because he was talking at the time, but it seems to me to be very important - that there must be an awareness-raising campaign on the significance of humanitarian aid, on what this humanitarian aid means to us, the European Union.
Mr Imbeni also said that the costs of that campaign should not be met with money intended for humanitarian aid.
I believe that this point, the subject of an amendment which has been presented this afternoon, is important and deserves our support.
What could be more important than humanitarian emergency aid?
In other words, saving the lives of numerous human beings by taking swift and effective action, making funds immediately available and ensuring that they are well-spent, whilst eliminating political deliberations and bureaucratic rigmarole.
Needless to say, the European Union has its work cut out in this respect.
More to the point, it can, and must, take a leading role in this field in view of the added value it offers compared with the individual States.
ECHO must become the central coordination platform for all Member States.
It must be equipped to this end, so that it can operate to best advantage, for this is about life and death and so only the very best is good enough.
This will entail extending and improving the staffing capacity, decentralising competences, formulating quantifiable objectives, systematic monitoring of the results, continuing to learn from past mistakes, and above all, improving coordination with the other offices of the Commission and the Member States.
In order to mobilise the necessary public support for emergency aid, it would be a good idea to give greater publicity to what Europe does and why.
Moreover, increased transparency would create an additional incentive to meet the highest demands.
The relationship between emergency aid, reconstruction and development is the same as that between the seed, the stems, and the leaves of a plant; one evolves naturally from the other.
And what this means in terms of ECHO, which is the seed, is that although it does not have to handle all the reconstruction work itself, it does have to make all the necessary preparations.
When it comes to the reconstruction and development phases, the Commission needs to bring its own staffing levels up to standard with all haste, and drastically reduce the procedures.
A number of speakers have already said as much this evening.
Only then will Europe be able to make a virtue of need.
Mr President, throughout the world, development aid is giving way to humanitarian aid.
Even here, the Directorate-General for External Relations is gradually taking charge of the areas that were formerly the responsibility of the Directorate-General for Development, with humanitarian aid compensating for the failures of external policy.
It is not just a question of providing aid, but also of restoring balance in the use of natural resources among all of the world' s inhabitants.
Unfortunately, humanitarian aid cannot play this role and must not serve only to bail out a liberal policy which at the same time murders the populations of the countries in receipt of aid.
Sustainable development is all but absent from the European Union' s humanitarian policy - we are quite unprepared for natural disasters and do little to prevent conflicts.
Systematic training in how to deal with earthquakes and floods as well as in preventing violence would be welcome in many parts of the world.
Instead of this, the European Union always reacts too late - once the disaster has been declared.
This lack of planning can be seen in the programmes of aid for health and nutrition, and gender issues are also ignored.
The connection between humanitarian and development policy, although crucial, is systematically missing.
It is important not to do just what is strictly necessary, but to prevent the effects of these catastrophes, and first of all, the factor that makes them worse, which is poverty.
We hope that cross-sector posts will be created in order to link ECHO and the Directorate-General for Development.
These could also initiate cooperation with other worldwide organisations in the field of humanitarian aid, beginning with those in Member States, since there is a considerable lack of coordination in their actions.
It is equally important that operating and assessment costs do not exceed 20% of ECHO' s budget.
Payments must also be made more rapidly.
Venezuela has been waiting since last December for the aid it was promised.
Even if we are satisfied overall with the European Union' s humanitarian policy, and if we are generally happy with Mr Imbeni' s report, this policy must, to a greater extent, be in keeping with sustainable development.
Mr President, first of all I should like to congratulate Mr Imbeni on an excellent report, into which he put a tremendous amount of work.
I want to refer to the question of Third World debt relief.
We must be more forceful in our efforts to put the issue of debt relief for Third World countries on a permanent footing.
The Jubilee 2000 campaign helped to focus international attention on the debt issue.
The campaign has been instrumental in achieving progress in providing additional relief both at multilateral level and by major bilateral creditors.
Poor countries face unsustainable debt burdens at the same time as they are confronting natural disasters, famine and the HIV/Aids pandemic.
Debt service payments often exceed health and education budgets.
Surely there is nothing more important in developing countries than education.
If people have literacy and numeracy they are a danger to the leadership of the worst-governed countries.
The World Bank and the International Monetary Fund have brought out an initiative as an official response to the major multilateral lending institutions and the need for debt relief. We all know that the link between debt relief and poverty reduction needs to be substantially strengthened.
Debt relief programmes for Third World countries must be put in place permanently.
The joint United Nations programmes on Aids has already estimated that 95% of all HIV-infected individuals live in developing countries.
The effect of the Aids pandemic means that progress and development become more difficult.
We must address this problem urgently.
The Ugandan President has set up a massive programme to deal with the Aids pandemic in his own country.
It is a great example for the rest of the African countries.
European Union leaders are meeting in Nice in December to discuss the reform of EU policy programmes.
I would once again call on EU leaders to address the need to control arms exports to Third World countries.
It is hard to believe that in the European Union, where all key economic sectors of activity are regulated and controlled by law, the export of arms to third countries seems to go unregulated for the most part.
This is a barbaric and hypocritical position.
EU leaders should have the courage to face up to the key defence manufacturers.
They would also win broader support from the citizens of the EU, who are seeking leadership on this issue.
Mr President, Commissioner, ladies and gentlemen, I too would like to express my thanks and congratulations to Mr Imbeni for his excellent report.
I agree with him that ECHO has in the past been and can continue to be in the future an excellent instrument for humanitarian intervention in the world' s crises, and this aid must be given an increasingly higher profile and become one of the trade marks of European Union action, for so it has been in recent years, I recall, for example when there was an ad hoc Commissioner for ECHO in the Commission.
I therefore feel that this evaluation, which attempts to improve the image of the programme, is right and necessary, and it appears, to a large extent, to be the aim of the excellent Imbeni report. I have tabled two purely technical amendments to the report, on the subject of the visibility of the programme in particular.
We need to strengthen, develop and, I would argue, provide autonomous funding for this opportunity for the European Union to publicise ECHO' s activities, for it is an unknown fact, for example, that it contributes over 50% to the budget of the Commissioner for Refugees.
I therefore call upon the Commission to give very serious consideration to Parliament' s suggestions and to take the Imbeni report carefully into account when carrying out the restructuring which is to take place to make ECHO' s actions increasingly useful and effective in assisting the areas and peoples in the greatest need.
You may be certain, Commissioner Patten, that this report is of the greatest importance to Parliament.
In the Committee on Development and Cooperation we have dedicated a great deal of time to humanitarian aid policies and you know that on this issue, in general, you will always have our support.
Firstly, I must today express my gratitude to the officials in ECHO and the staff of the NGOs who, in extremely precarious circumstances, when everything is failing on the ground, are the first, the most self-sacrificing, and often the only ones to provide essential humanitarian aid.
I must remind you that in Rwanda, in Kosovo, in Mozambique, in Central America, the sacrifices, sometimes of their lives, of those working in cooperation with us, have been some of the most inspiring stories in the history of the European Union.
In the small amount of time I have for this intervention I must add that I agree with the Imbeni report and, in particular, I would like to highlight the following issues.
As has been said, we must clarify the so-called dilemma of the 'grey area' . We must clarify the procedures and, in some cases, the legal basis and the responsibility of each party, in order to make the management of ECHO more efficient.
I have already referred to the problem of human resources, as well as the problem of visibility, and the objectives must be clarified.
In certain cases, in Cuba for example - as you know, Commissioner - in the guise of humanitarian aid, programmes are implemented which are no such thing, but simply a form of concealed cooperation, sometimes for reasons of 'ideological solidarity' with the Castro regime.
For the future, it is necessary to improve management, increase cooperation with our partners, improve complementarity with the actions carried out through the efforts of Member States and, in short, frame the humanitarian aid actions of the European Union within the global strategy of our cooperation policies.
. Mr President, I should like to say at the outset that I welcome without reservation Mr Imbeni's extremely constructive report.
It is an excellent piece of work and both my colleague, Commissioner Nielson, and I are delighted by the arguments set out.
We are delighted by the broad welcome which has been given to the Commission's communication on its assessment and future plans for the Community's humanitarian activities.
Many congratulations to the honourable Member.
Humanitarian aid, as a number of honourable Members have said, is an extremely important facet of the European Union's external identity.
I am the first to acknowledge that we have a great deal to do to improve our performance.
But, it is also important that we should acknowledge the enormous amount of good that our help does, day-in day-out, often in extremely difficult circumstances, often in very difficult situations right across the world.
Whatever the faults - and it is our responsibility to try to put them right - let me pay tribute to what has been achieved and is being achieved by European Union aid and by the generous support of Europe's taxpayers.
We are the biggest providers of this humanitarian assistance in the world and it is important, occasionally, that we remember that.
We very much appreciate Parliament's support for the reforms we are seeking.
Much of the strategy which honourable Members urge on us tallies, marches very closely, with what we anyway wanted to do.
I would stress that however much we might all like to do more we have to focus our action, given the very limited human resources at our disposal, on getting right what we are trying to do already.
In this context, the Commission has decided to focus ECHO's interventions based on a definition of the term "humanitarian" which is, in my judgement, generous and flexible but is not infinitely elastic.
We believe it would be wrong to overload ECHO with an ever-growing number of tasks simply for reasons of administrative ease.
Both Commissioner Nielson and I want to help countries and peoples in emergencies.
But we also want to help them out of emergencies so that they can stand on their own feet again as quickly as possible.
We will address this through country strategies which bring together the various types of assistance, emergency, developmental and so on, as quickly as it is feasible to do so.
That in my view is the best kind of assistance and it is the wisest use of our taxpayers' money.
Let me add that we do not intend to make ECHO into an operational department which delivers aid from contingency planning to distribution in the field.
That is not, and never has been, where ECHO's strengths lie.
Such an approach would be ineffective and it would detract from the many advantages of ECHO's partnership approach which allows it, as has been said, to make funds quickly available to those who need them most.
The partnership approach also allows for real involvement of civil society at the outset of aid operations, and the value of that has been proven time and time again.
We will continue to choose partners on the basis of their efficiency and the availability of partners for the task in hand and bearing in mind, of course, their different comparative strengths and the roles they can play.
The NGO sector is an extremely important channel, but the United Nations and the Red Cross movement are also valued partners.
Thanks to this mixed approach to partnership when necessary, we will be able to send specific messages to the different political fora.
Mr Imbeni mentioned the important issue of visibility.
That is important.
We want Europe's voters and taxpayers to know what is being done with their money and in their name.
We have planned a Eurobarometer survey to gauge the current levels of awareness of ECHO in Member States and on the basis of that survey, which of course we will want to discuss with the honourable Member and others, we will be able to develop appropriate ways of increasing the awareness to which the honourable Member referred.
The humanitarian aid we give will continue to be governed by the principles of impartiality and non-discrimination laid down in our regulation and accepted by the humanitarian community worldwide.
It is an element of our external identity demonstrating that Europe can act worldwide with one voice and that it can make a difference on the ground.
As the biggest single source of humanitarian aid funding worldwide, as I said earlier, the European Union has a responsibility to be not just the biggest in terms of quantity but the best in terms of delivery.
That is our clear and ambitious goal.
I should like to end with just one reflection.
I do not come entirely new to the debate on these issues.
Over ten years ago I was the development minister in the country I know best, as we learn to say, and was responsible among other things for humanitarian assistance.
What has most depressed me about the international scene over the years is that, in practice, our ability to deliver humanitarian relief rapidly in the most unpromising circumstances has increased a great deal more than our ability to prevent that humanitarian assistance being necessary in the first place.
That raises serious political and environmental questions about issues such as humanitarian intervention which are going to dominate much of the foreign policy agenda in the years ahead.
But in the meantime we must make what we do in terms of humanitarian aid more effective.
The honourable Member's report will make a significant contribution to that .
Thank you very much, Commissioner Patten.